# Tech's new generation and the end of thinking

There's a short story by Scott Alexander called "The Whispering Earring," in which he describes a mystical piece of jewelry buried deep in "the treasure-vaults of Til Iosophrang." The whispering earring is a little topaz gem that speaks to you. Its advice always begins with the words "Better for you if you . . . ," and its advice is never wrong. The earring starts out by advising you on major life decisions, but before long it's telling you exactly what to have for breakfast, exactly when to go to bed, and eventually, how to move each individual muscle in your body. "The wearer lives an abnormally successful life, usually ending out as a rich and much-beloved pillar of the community with a large and happy family," writes Alexander. After you die, the priests preparing your body for burial usually find that your brain has almost entirely rotted away, except for the parts associated with reflexive action. The first time you dangle the earring near your ear, it whispers: "Better for you if you take me off."

There are people who can't order at a restaurant without having an AI scan the menu and tell them what to eat; people who no longer know how to talk to their friends and family and get ChatGPT to do it instead. For Alexander, this is a kind of Sartrean _mauvaise foi._ "It's terrifying to ask someone out," he said. "What you want is to have the dating site that tells you that algorithmically you've been matched with this person, and then magically you have permission to talk to them. I think there's something similar going on here with AI. Many of these people are smart enough that they could answer their own questions, but they want someone else to do it, because then they don't have to have this terrifying encounter with their own humanity." His best-case scenario for AI is essentially the antithesis of Roy's: superintelligence that will actively refuse to give us everything we want, for the sake of preserving our humanity. "If we ever get AI that is strong enough to basically be God and solve all of our problems, it will need to use the same techniques that the actual God uses in terms of maintaining some distance. I do think it's possible that the AI will be like, _Now I am God. I've concluded that the actual God made exactly the right decision on how much evil to permit in the universe. Therefore I refuse to change anything._"

https://harpers.org/archive/2026/03/childs-play-sam-kriss-ai-startup-roy-lee/
